# Course3_FinalProject
Code for getting and cleaning data course project calculating mean of several wearable data variables 

INCLUDED FILES
This analysis includes the following files:
1) README.txt
2) run_analysis.R

All code for running the analysis is contained in run_analysis.R. Explanatory comments are provided throughout run_analysis.R. The explanation provided in the EXPLANATION OF RUN_ANALYSIS.R section below is largely redundant with these comments. 

OVERVIEW
This project calculates the mean of data from 561 variables generated by a smartphone. The data comes from the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset, Version 1.0, source: Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory, DITEN - Universit‡ degli Studi di Genova. Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws www.smartlab.ws

DATASET BACKGROUND
Several experiments were carried out by 30 volunteers performing one of six activities: walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing, and laying wearing a Samsung Galaxy S II smartphone. The dataset was partitioned into two sets, with 70% of the volunteers generating training data and 30% generating test data. The smartphone's accelerometer and gyroscope captured linear acceleration and angular velocity in the X, Y, and Z directions. Per the dataset's readme file: "The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain." For more information about the dataset contact: activityrecognition@smartlab.ws

DATASET LICENSE
Use of the dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

The dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited. Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.

OBJECTIVE
The goal of the run_analysis.R script is to generate a tidy dataset that calculates the mean for variables within the dataset that extract the mean or standard deviation of each of the accelerometer's and gyroscope's measurements. This resulting mean is indexed according to both the 30 volunteers ("subjects") and the six activities ("activities"). The 561 variables represent technical features ("features") calculated by the Galaxy smartphone.

Interim objectives required to reach this goal are: 1) merge the training and the test sets to create one data set; 2) extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement; 3) use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set; 4) appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names. 

EXPLANATION OF RUN_ANALYSIS.R
The file firsts creates a data directory, installs the dplyr package, and downloads the dataset from https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip.  

The file then reads in a series of files. The bulk of the data comes from X_test.txt and X_train.txt. These files are the text and training datasets containing 7,352 and 2,947 observations, respectively, from the 561 variables. Next y_train.txt and y_test.txt are read, which contain numeric codes corresponding to one of the six activitiees described in the above dataset background section. Finally subject_train.txt and subject_test.txt files are read, which contain numeric codes corresponding to one of the 30 volunteers for the study.

Next the file accomplishes the third interim objective of using descriptive activity names to name the activities. This is done by changing the six numeric codes in y_train.txt and y_test.txt to their string equivalents.

Next the dataset's columns are named with "subject" as the first column, "activity" as the second column, and the 561 features as the remaining columns. The features variable names come from the file features.txt included in the dataset.

The next step is to merge the data. cbind is used to first combine the features and activities, then the subjects are added to this dataframe. Finally the test and train data are combined using rbind.

Next duplicate column names are removed.

Next only the mean and standard deviation measurements are extracted. 

The dataset is then grouped by subject and activity, and the mean of each variable is calculated. This process removes the column names for "subject" and "activity", so these are added in again here. 

Finally the dataset is outputted as mean_grouped_mean_std_data, and the data is written to a text file using write.table. 

READING THE DATASET
The dataset may be read in using the following command:
data <- read.table(file_path, header = TRUE). Appreciation is expressed to David Hood for providing this code on https://thoughtfulbloke.wordpress.com/2015/09/09/getting-and-cleaning-the-assignment/.













